
A cheerful wife is the spice of life.



A good mind possesses a kingdom.



A good name is the best of all treasures.



The apple never falls far from the tree.



Advice most needed is least heeded.



Advisers run no risks.



All are not thieves that the dogs bark at.



All's fair in love and war.



All are not friends that speak us fair.



All roads lead to Rome.



All things come to those who wait.



All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.



An army marches on its stomach.



March winds and April showers bring forth May flowers.



As you make your bed, so you must lie on it.

Similar to You reap what you sow


Similar to You reap what you sow
A hedge between keeps friends green.



A verbal contract isn't worth the paper it's written on.



Absence makes the heart grow fonder.

From Isle of Beauty by Thomas Haynes Bayly


From Isle of Beauty by Thomas Haynes Bayly
Actions speak louder than words.



A friend in need is a friend indeed.

Prove thy friend ere thou have need; but, in-deed
A friend is never known till a man have need.


Prove thy friend ere thou have need; but, in-deed
A friend is never known till a man have need.
All cats love fish but hate to get their paws wet.



All for one and one for all.



All good things must come to an end.



All's well that ends well.

Title of a play by William Shakespeare


Title of a play by William Shakespeare
All that glisters is not gold.

William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, act II, scene 7.
Often corrupted to: All that glitters is not gold.


William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, act II, scene 7.
Often corrupted to: All that glitters is not gold.
A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.



An apple a day keeps the doctor away.



As the old cock crows, so crows the young.



Ask me no questions, I'll tell you no lies.



A rotten apple injures its neighbors.
Bad news travels fast.



A bad penny always turns up.



A bad settlement is better than a good lawsuit.



Be careful what you wish for, you just might get it.



Well begun is half done.



A bellyful is one of meat, drink, or sorrow.



Bend the willow while it is young

Definition= influence young people while they are young and impressionable.


Definition= influence young people while they are young and impressionable.
The best things come in small packages.



The best things in life are free.



Better an egg today than a hen tomorrow.



Better is the enemy of good.



Big thunder, little rain.
Better late than never.



Better safe than sorry.



Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

Jesus, Matthew 7:15 KJV


Jesus, Matthew 7:15 KJV
Birds of a feather flock together.



Bitter pills may have blessed effects.



Blood is thicker than water.



Beauty is in the eyes of the beholder



A bad workman blames his tools.


Never hand an ill workman good tools.
An ill labourer quarrels with his tools.

The Works of George Herbert in Prose and Verse; 1881, New York: John Wurtele Lovell, Pub.; pp. 440 & 454.




Compare the older French proverb:






Galen explains clearly, if less succinctly, in De Causis Procatarcticis (2nd c. A.D.), VI. 63–65:









Never hand an ill workman good tools.
An ill labourer quarrels with his tools.

The Works of George Herbert in Prose and Verse; 1881, New York: John Wurtele Lovell, Pub.; pp. 440 & 454.




Never hand an ill workman good tools.
An ill labourer quarrels with his tools.

The Works of George Herbert in Prose and Verse; 1881, New York: John Wurtele Lovell, Pub.; pp. 440 & 454.


The Works of George Herbert in Prose and Verse; 1881, New York: John Wurtele Lovell, Pub.; pp. 440 & 454.
Compare the older French proverb:









Galen explains clearly, if less succinctly, in De Causis Procatarcticis (2nd c. A.D.), VI. 63–65:









Barking dogs seldom bite.



Before criticizing a man, walk a mile in his shoes.



Beggars can't be choosers.



The belly has no ears.

This Proverb intimates, that there is no arguing the Matter with Hunger,
the Mother of Impatience and Anger. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [3]


This Proverb intimates, that there is no arguing the Matter with Hunger,
the Mother of Impatience and Anger. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [3]
Better to be alone than in bad company.



Better the devil you know (than the devil you don't).



Better to remain silent and be thought a fool, than to open your mouth and remove all doubt.

Attributed to Abraham Lincoln.


Attributed to Abraham Lincoln.
Beware of Greeks bearing gifts.



A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.









A blow with a word strikes deeper than a blow with a sword.



Part I, Section II, Member IV, Subsection IV




Compare: The pen is mightier than the sword.
Contrast: Sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me.




Part I, Section II, Member IV, Subsection IV





Part I, Section II, Member IV, Subsection IV


Part I, Section II, Member IV, Subsection IV
Compare: The pen is mightier than the sword.
Contrast: Sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me.
Bloom where you are planted.

Other meaning: Make use of your geographical advantages.


Other meaning: Make use of your geographical advantages.
Boys will be boys.



Brag is a good Dog, but Holdfast is a better.

This Proverb is a Taunt upon Braggadoccio's, who talk big, boast, and rattle:
It is also a Memento for such who make plentiful promises to do well for the
future but are suspected to want Constancy and Resolution to make
them good. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [4]


This Proverb is a Taunt upon Braggadoccio's, who talk big, boast, and rattle:
It is also a Memento for such who make plentiful promises to do well for the
future but are suspected to want Constancy and Resolution to make
them good. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [4]
A broken watch is right two times a day.



A burnt child dreads the fire.

Chinese Version: One bitten by a snake for a snap dreads a rope for a decade.一朝被蛇咬，十年怕井绳
Cf. Once bitten, twice shy
This Proverb intimates, That it is natural for all living Creatures, whether rational or irrational,
to consult their own Security, and Self-Preservation; and whether they act by Instinct or Reason, it still


Chinese Version: One bitten by a snake for a snap dreads a rope for a decade.一朝被蛇咬，十年怕井绳
Cf. Once bitten, twice shy
This Proverb intimates, That it is natural for all living Creatures, whether rational or irrational,
to consult their own Security, and Self-Preservation; and whether they act by Instinct or Reason, it still
By hook or by crook.



The calm (comes) before the storm.



A cat may look at a king.



Clothes make the man.



The customer is always right.



A candle loses nothing by lighting another candle.

You don't lose anything by enlightening others.


You don't lose anything by enlightening others.
Catch not a shadow and lose the substance.



A chain is only as strong as its weakest link.

Variant.: A chain is no stronger than its weakest link.


Variant.: A chain is no stronger than its weakest link.
The child is father to the man.



Cometh the hour, cometh the man.

(Some information about the phrase and about its use by a 1940's cricketer).


(Some information about the phrase and about its use by a 1940's cricketer).
Common sense is not so common.

Paraphrased by graphic designers as 'Comic Sans is not so comic'.


Paraphrased by graphic designers as 'Comic Sans is not so comic'.
Confidence begets confidence.



Courage lost, all lost.



A coward dies a thousand times before his death. The valiant never taste of death but once.



Deal gently with the bird you mean to catch.



Deep calls to deep.



Desperate times call for desperate measures.



Different strokes for different folks.



Don't bark if you can't bite.



Don't bite off more than you can chew.



Don't bite the hand that feeds you.



Don't burn the candle at both ends.



Don't count your chickens before they're hatched.



Don't cross a bridge before you come to it.



Don't cut off your nose to spite your face.



Don't fall before you're pushed.



Don't have too many irons in the fire.



Don't judge a book by its cover.



Don't look a gift horse in the mouth.



Don't make a mountain out of a molehill.



Don't make clothes for a not yet born baby.



Don't mend what ain't broken.

Alternatively, If it ain't broke, don't fix it.
Alternatively, Leave well enough alone.


Alternatively, If it ain't broke, don't fix it.
Alternatively, Leave well enough alone.
Do not play with edged tools.



Doctors make the worst patients.



Discretion is the better part of valor.



Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.



Don't carry coals to Newcastle.

The Newcastle region of England mined and shipped coal.


The Newcastle region of England mined and shipped coal.
Don't go between the tree and the bark.



Don't put all your eggs in one basket.



Don't put the cart before the horse.



Don't throw the baby out with the bathwater.



The door swings both ways.



Each to his own taste

French: Chacun sey goût
Alternatively: à chacun son goût - To each his own.


French: Chacun sey goût
Alternatively: à chacun son goût - To each his own.
The early bird catches the worm. But the second mouse gets the cheese.

Other meaning: Those who starts working early in the morning will get much done.
Other meaning: One person might discover or create something, but the person after him will become rich because of it.


Other meaning: Those who starts working early in the morning will get much done.
Other meaning: One person might discover or create something, but the person after him will become rich because of it.
An empty vessel makes the most noise

French equivalent: It is not the cow that moos the most that gives the most milk.


French equivalent: It is not the cow that moos the most that gives the most milk.
An Englishman's home is his castle.

Variant of A man's home is his castle.


Variant of A man's home is his castle.
Every cloud has a silver lining.



Every rose has its thorn.



The exception proves the rule.



Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise.

Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard's Almanack (1735 edition), October.


Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard's Almanack (1735 edition), October.
Eat your own dog food.



Education is a progressive discovery of our own ignorance.

Will Durant, quoted in Books: The Great Gadfly, Time magazine, 8 October 1965.


Will Durant, quoted in Books: The Great Gadfly, Time magazine, 8 October 1965.
The ends justify the means.

Ovid, Heroides (c. 10 BC): Exitus acta probat. See also: Means and ends.


Ovid, Heroides (c. 10 BC): Exitus acta probat. See also: Means and ends.
Even a broken clock is right twice a day.



Even a dog can distinguish between being stumbled over and being kicked.



Every dog has its day.

Variation on a quote from Hamlet: ...whatever Hercules says, the cat will mew and dog will have its day.


Variation on a quote from Hamlet: ...whatever Hercules says, the cat will mew and dog will have its day.
Every tub must stand upon its bottom.



Everyone talks of changing the world, but no one talks of changing himself.

Leo Tolstoy.


Leo Tolstoy.
Evil begets evil.



An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.









Failure is the stepping stone for success.



Faint heart ne'er won fair lady.



Familiarity breeds contempt.



Fifty percent of something is better than one hundred percent of nothing.

Scaffidi, S. Ain't Dat Super!, Xlibris Corporation.


Scaffidi, S. Ain't Dat Super!, Xlibris Corporation.
Fine feathers make fine birds.



Fine words butter no parsnips.

Cf. Actions speak louder than words.


Cf. Actions speak louder than words.
First come, first served.



First deserve, then desire.



The first step to health is to know that we are sick.



First things first.



A fool and his money are soon parted.



Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me.



Forewarned is forearmed.



Forgive and forget.



A fox smells its own lair first. Or: A fox smells its own stink first.



Fretting cares make grey hairs.



A friend in need is a friend indeed.



Fools rush in where angels fear to tread.

Alexander Pope, An Essay on Criticism


Alexander Pope, An Essay on Criticism



From those to whom much is given, much is expected.

Biblical quote Luke 12:48.


Biblical quote Luke 12:48.
Fortune favours the brave.



Footprints on the sands of time are not made by sitting down.



Garbage in, garbage out.



Give a dog a bad name and hang him.



Give a dog a bad name and he'll live up to it. (or ...he'll repay you for it.)




This quote is much older than 2006.citation needed


This quote is much older than 2006.citation needed
Give and take is fair play.

I could have better spar'd a better man.
William Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I (c. 1597), Act V, scene 4, line 104


I could have better spar'd a better man.
William Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I (c. 1597), Act V, scene 4, line 104
Give, and ye shall receive.

Luke 6:38


Luke 6:38
Give credit where credit is due.

Derived from Romans 13:7.


Derived from Romans 13:7.
Give him an inch and he'll take a yard.



Go with the flow.



God cures and the physician takes the fee.



A golden bit does not make the horse any better.



Good fences make good neighbors.

Robert Frost, Mending Wall


Robert Frost, Mending Wall
Good men are hard to find.



A good surgeon has an eagle's eye, a lion's heart, and a lady's hand.



Good swimmers are often drowned.



Good things come to those who wait.



Good wine needs no bush.



The grass is always greener on the other side.



Grasp all, lose all.



Great events cast their shadows before them.

The Edinburgh review, Volym 132. A. and C. Black. 1870. p. 231. .


The Edinburgh review, Volym 132. A. and C. Black. 1870. p. 231. .
Great minds agree.



Great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds.

Albert Einstein


Albert Einstein
A guilty conscience needs no accuser.



A half truth is a whole lie.



You can't Have your cake and eat it too.

Cf. George Herbert The Sizz Wouldst thou both eat thy cake and have it


Cf. George Herbert The Sizz Wouldst thou both eat thy cake and have it
Hard words break no bones.



Haste makes waste.



Hawks will not pick out Hawk's eyes.



The head and feet keep warm, the rest will take no harm.



He laughs best who laughs last.



He that can have patience can have what he will.



He who dares wins.



Health is wealth.



Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned



Hindsight is always twenty-twenty.

20-20 refers to perfect vision.


20-20 refers to perfect vision.
Home is where the heart is



He who hesitates is lost.

Other meaning: Delay may have disastrous results.


Other meaning: Delay may have disastrous results.
Handsome is what handsome does.

Behaviour is more important than looks.


Behaviour is more important than looks.
I complained I had no shoes until I met a man who had no feet.



Idle hands are the devil's playthings.



If a job is worth doing, it is worth doing well.



If at first you don't succeed, try, try again.

Cf. William Edward Hickson's Try and Try again
Tis a lesson you should heed:
Try, try, try again.
If at first you don't succeed,
Try, try, try again


Cf. William Edward Hickson's Try and Try again
Tis a lesson you should heed:
Try, try, try again.
If at first you don't succeed,
Try, try, try again
If it ain't broke, don't fix it.



If it can't be cured, it must be endured.

From Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie


From Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie



If it's too good to be true, then it probably is.



If God had wanted man to fly, He would have given him wings.



If life gives you lemons, make lemonade.



If something can go wrong, it will.

Murphy's Law


Murphy's Law
If the shoe fits, wear it.



If the truth hurts, you are not living right.

From the television show The Killing.


From the television show The Killing.
If wishes were fishes, we'd all cast nets.



If wishes were horses, beggars would ride.



If you buy cheaply, you pay dearly.

Alternatively: You get what you pay for


Alternatively: You get what you pay for
If you buy quality, you only cry once.



If you can't be good, be careful.



If you can't beat them, join them.



If you can't take the heat, get out of the kitchen.



If you don't have anything nice to say, don't say anything at all.



If you got it flaunt it.






If you make yourself into a doormat, people will wipe their feet on you.



If you snooze you lose



If you sup with the devil, use a long spoon.



If you trust before you try, you may repent before you die.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [8]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [8]
If you fail to plan, then you plan to fail.



If you want a thing done right, do it yourself.



If you're in a hole, stop digging.



If you're not part of the solution, you're part of the problem.



Ignorance is bliss.

Common mal-shortening of Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise.
Thomas Gray, Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College [[9]]


Common mal-shortening of Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise.
Thomas Gray, Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College [[9]]
In for a penny, in for a pound.

Alternate version: In for a dime, in for a dollar.


Alternate version: In for a dime, in for a dollar.
In one ear and out the other.

Cf. Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales: One eare it heard, at the other out it went


Cf. Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales: One eare it heard, at the other out it went
In order to get where you want to go, you first have to leave where you are.

From Sandy Elsberg's Bread Winner, Bread Baker; Upline Press, Charlottesville, VA; 1977, p. 80.


From Sandy Elsberg's Bread Winner, Bread Baker; Upline Press, Charlottesville, VA; 1977, p. 80.
In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.



In the middle of difficulty lies opportunity.



Insanity is doing the same thing over and over, expecting different results.

Alternatively Stupidity is doing the same thing over and over, and expecting different results


Alternatively Stupidity is doing the same thing over and over, and expecting different results
It ain't over till the fat lady sings.



It's a cracked pitcher that goes longest to the well.



It's a good horse that never stumbles.



It's a long lane that has no turning.



It's always darkest before the dawn.



It's an ill wind that blows no good.



It's better to be safe than sorry.



It's better to be silent and thought a fool, than to speak up and remove all doubt.



It is better to die on one's feet than live on one's knees.



It's better to give than to receive.



It's better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all.



It's cheaper to keep her.



It's easier to ask forgiveness than permission.

Attributed to Grace Hopper


Attributed to Grace Hopper
It's easy to be wise after the event.



It's never too late to mend.



It's no use crying over spilt milk.



It ain't over till it's over.

Yogi Berra


Yogi Berra
It's the early bird that gets the worm.

Other meaning: Those who starts working early in the morning gets much done.


Other meaning: Those who starts working early in the morning gets much done.
It's the empty can that makes the most noise.

French equivalent: It is not the cow that moos the most that gives the most milk.


French equivalent: It is not the cow that moos the most that gives the most milk.
It takes all sorts to make a world.

Alternatively: It takes all sorts to make the world go round.
Alternatively: It takes all kinds to make the world go round.


Alternatively: It takes all sorts to make the world go round.
Alternatively: It takes all kinds to make the world go round.
It takes two to make a quarrel.



It takes two to tango.



Jack of all trades and master of None. (18th Century)



Joan is as good as my lady in the dark. (17th Century)



A journey of a thousand miles starts with a single step.

Laozi, Tao Te Ching, Ch. 64, line 12. 千里之行，始于足下


Laozi, Tao Te Ching, Ch. 64, line 12. 千里之行，始于足下
Judge each day not by the harvest you reap but by the seeds you plant.

Battle Cries for the Underdog: Fightin' Words for an Extraordinary Life, Volume 1.


Battle Cries for the Underdog: Fightin' Words for an Extraordinary Life, Volume 1.
Justice delayed is justice denied. (Legal Proverb, India)



Kill your darlings.



Keep your mouth shut and your eyes open.



Keep your friends close, but your enemies closer.



Keep your mouth shut and your ears open.



Kindness, like grain, increase by sowing.



A kingdom is lost for want of a shoe.

See: For want of a nail the shoe is lost, ...


See: For want of a nail the shoe is lost, ...
Knaves and fools divide the world.



Knowledge is power. (17th Century)



Kindness, like a boomerang, always returns.



Laugh and the world laughs with you. Cry and you cry alone.

Laugh and the world laughs with you. Cry and your mascara runs. - variation by advice columnist Ann Landers.


Laugh and the world laughs with you. Cry and your mascara runs. - variation by advice columnist Ann Landers.
Laughter is the shortest distance between two people.



The law is a jealous mistress.

- Professor Ferdinand Fairfax Stone, Tulane Law School, early and mid 1960s.


- Professor Ferdinand Fairfax Stone, Tulane Law School, early and mid 1960s.
Law is the solemn expression of legislative will.



Lead by example.



Learn to walk before you run.



Least said sooner mended.



Less is more.



Let him who is without sin cast the first stone.

Jesus Christ


Jesus Christ
Let sleeping dogs lie.



Let the cobbler stick to his last.



A lie can be halfway around the world before the truth gets its boots on.

Charles Spurgeon. A great lie may be widely accepted before the truth comes to light.


Charles Spurgeon. A great lie may be widely accepted before the truth comes to light.
Lie down with dogs, wake up with fleas.



Life begins at forty.



Life imitates art.



Life imitates chess. - Garry Kasparov



Life is ten percent what happens to you and ninety percent how you respond to it.

Unknown origin, though sometimes attributed to Lou Holtz or Chuck Swindoll


Unknown origin, though sometimes attributed to Lou Holtz or Chuck Swindoll
Life is like a box of chocolates. You never know what you're gonna get.

- From the film, Forrest Gump.


- From the film, Forrest Gump.
Life is too short.



Life is what happens to you while you're busy making other plans.

Attributed to John Lennon


Attributed to John Lennon
Life is what you do while you're waiting to die.

Quote from song sung by Zorba from the musical 'Zorba' by Kander and Ebb.


Quote from song sung by Zorba from the musical 'Zorba' by Kander and Ebb.
Life is what you make of it. Always has been, always will be.

Unknown origin, though sometimes attributed to Eleanor Roosevelt or Grandma Moses


Unknown origin, though sometimes attributed to Eleanor Roosevelt or Grandma Moses



Lightning never strikes twice in the same place.



Like cures like.



Like father, like son.



Little by little and bit by bit.



A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.

A little Learning is a dangerous Thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian Spring:
There shallow Draughts intoxicate the Brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again. ~ Alexander Pope


A little Learning is a dangerous Thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian Spring:
There shallow Draughts intoxicate the Brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again. ~ Alexander Pope
Live and let live.

Alternative: Live simply to let others simply live.


Alternative: Live simply to let others simply live.
The longest mile is the last mile home.



Look after the pennies and the pounds will look after themselves.



Look before you leap.



Look on the sunny side of life.



Loose lips sink ships.



Love is blind.



Love is like war, Easy to start, Hard to end, Impossible to forget.

Kumar, E. S. The Unofficial Joke book of New SMS, Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd.


Kumar, E. S. The Unofficial Joke book of New SMS, Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd.
Love is not finding someone to live with; it's finding someone whom you can't live without.



Love is stronger than any addiction, baby. Hell, it is one. - Madea



Love laughs at locksmiths.



Make the best of a bad bargain.



A man is known by the company he keeps.



A man's home is his castle.



Translation: What more sacred, what more strongly guarded by every holy feeling, than a man's own home?








Translation: What more sacred, what more strongly guarded by every holy feeling, than a man's own home?





Translation: What more sacred, what more strongly guarded by every holy feeling, than a man's own home?


Translation: What more sacred, what more strongly guarded by every holy feeling, than a man's own home?
A mans worst enemies are often those of his own house.



Man proposes but God disposes.



Manners maketh the man.

From 'Manners makyth man' - the motto of William of Wykeham(1320 - 1404).


From 'Manners makyth man' - the motto of William of Wykeham(1320 - 1404).
Many a mickle makes a muckle.



Many a true word is spoken in jest.



Many go out for wool, and come home shorn themselves.



Many hands make light work.



Many things are lost for want of asking.



Many words will not fill a bushel.

This Proverb is a severe Taunt upon much Talking. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [10]


This Proverb is a severe Taunt upon much Talking. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [10]
Marry in haste, and repent at leisure.



Measure twice, cut once.



Mind your P's and Q's.

British: Mind your manners (origin theories)


British: Mind your manners (origin theories)
Misery loves company.



Misfortunes never come singly.



A miss by an inch is a miss by a mile.



Missing the wood for the trees.



Money cannot buy happiness.



(Love of) Money is the root of all evil.



Money makes the mare go.



Money makes the world go around.



Money talks.

Related: Talk is cheap.
Related: Actions speak louder than words.


Related: Talk is cheap.
Related: Actions speak louder than words.
Monkey see, monkey do.



More haste, less speed.



The more things change, the more they stay the same.

From the French: Plus ça change, plus c'est pareil.


From the French: Plus ça change, plus c'est pareil.



The nail that sticks up will be hammered down.



Nature never did betray the heart that loved her.



Nature, time, and patience are three great physicians.



Necessity is the mother of invention.



Never cast a clout till May be out.



Never judge a book by its cover.



Never let the right hand know what the left hand is doing.



Never lie to your doctor.



Never lie to your lawyer.



Never look a gift horse in the mouth.



Never put off till (until) tomorrow what you can do today.



Never say die.



Never say never.



Never trouble trouble 'til trouble troubles you.



Never wear a brown hat in Friesland.



A new broom sweeps clean.



A night with Venus and a life with mercury.

Anti-promiscuity adage, alluding to a 18th-century mercury-based folk treatment for syphilis
Cited in Bartz, Diane (30 October 2006). Har, me hearties! Excavating Blackbeard's ship. Reuters (via Yahoo! News). Retrieved on 2006-11-01.


Anti-promiscuity adage, alluding to a 18th-century mercury-based folk treatment for syphilis
Cited in Bartz, Diane (30 October 2006). Har, me hearties! Excavating Blackbeard's ship. Reuters (via Yahoo! News). Retrieved on 2006-11-01.
No man can serve two masters.

Christian New Testament


Christian New Testament
No man is an island.



No man is born into this world, whose work is not born with him.



No man is indispensable.



No news is good news.



No pain, no gain.



No time like the present.



Noblesse oblige.

French expression: the nobility is obligated to care for the lower classes.


French expression: the nobility is obligated to care for the lower classes.
None but the brave deserve the fair.

John Dryden, Alexander's Feast.


John Dryden, Alexander's Feast.
There are none so blind as they who will not see.



Nothing succeeds like success.



Nothing to be feared in life, but understood.



Nothing ventured, nothing gained.



An old dog will learn no tricks.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721[13]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721[13]
Old habits die hard.



One good turn deserves another.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721[14]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721[14]
One grain of sand can tip the scale.



One man's junk is another man's treasure.



One man's meat is another man's poison.



One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter. - Ronald Reagan



One might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb. - English, 17th century



One murder makes a villain, millions a hero.



One rotten apple will spoil the whole barrel.

Other meaning: One flaw will ruin the overall impression.


Other meaning: One flaw will ruin the overall impression.
One scabbed sheep mars the whole flock.

This Proverb is apply'd to such Persons who being vicious themselves,
labour to debauch those with whom they converse. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [15]


This Proverb is apply'd to such Persons who being vicious themselves,
labour to debauch those with whom they converse. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [15]
One swallow doesn't make a summer.



Once bitten, twice shy.



The only free cheese is in the mouse trap.

Russian saying.


Russian saying.
The only stupid question is the one that is not asked.



Opportunity knocks only once.



An ounce of discretion is worth a pound of wit.



Our greatest glory is not in never falling but in rising every time we fall.

Confucius


Confucius
Out of sight... Out of mind.

Cf. Fulke Greville's sonnet And out of minds as soons as out of sight


Cf. Fulke Greville's sonnet And out of minds as soons as out of sight
Out of small acorns grow mighty oaks.

A meager beginning can still result in something magnificent.


A meager beginning can still result in something magnificent.
Paddle your own canoe.



The pen is mightier than the sword.



A penny saved is a penny earned.

Attributed to Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard's Almanac, but actually 17th c. English


Attributed to Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard's Almanac, but actually 17th c. English
Penny wise, pound foolish.



People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.


George Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs, 1640; cited in Proverbs 120. The Yale Book of Quotations. 2006. pp. p. 613. ISBN 0-300-10798-6.
George Herbert, Jacula Prudentum, 1651, number 196.





George Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs, 1640; cited in Proverbs 120. The Yale Book of Quotations. 2006. pp. p. 613. ISBN 0-300-10798-6.
George Herbert, Jacula Prudentum, 1651, number 196.


George Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs, 1640; cited in Proverbs 120. The Yale Book of Quotations. 2006. pp. p. 613. ISBN 0-300-10798-6.
George Herbert, Jacula Prudentum, 1651, number 196.
Perfect Planning Prevents Piss Poor Performance. (a.k.a The six P's)



A picture is worth a thousand words.

(Originally a marketing slogan, promoting magazine display ads.)


(Originally a marketing slogan, promoting magazine display ads.)
The pitcher which goes too often to the well gets broken.



Politeness costs nothing and gains everything. <M.W. Montagu>



Politics makes strange bedfellows.



Poets are born, but orators are trained.



Power tends to corrupt; absolute power corrupts absolutely.

Attributed to Lord Acton


Attributed to Lord Acton
Practice before you preach.



Practice makes perfect.



Prevention is better than cure.



Pride comes before the fall. (Pride comes before a fall.)



The proof of the pudding is in the eating.



Procrastination is the thief of time.



Proverbs run in pairs.



Put a beggar on horseback and he'll ride it to death.



Put a beggar on horseback and he'll ride to the devil.



Put your money where your mouth is.



Reality is not only stranger than we imagine, it is stranger than we can imagine.



Reality is often stranger than fiction.



Repetition is the mother of memory.

Latin: REPETITIO MATER MEMORIAE


Latin: REPETITIO MATER MEMORIAE
Revenge is a dish best served cold.



A rising tide lifts all boats.


As they say on my own Cape Cod, a rising tide lifts all the boats.





As they say on my own Cape Cod, a rising tide lifts all the boats.


As they say on my own Cape Cod, a rising tide lifts all the boats.
The road to hell is paved with good intentions.



A rolling stone gathers no moss.

Early versions include:

Saxum volutum non obducitur musco

A rolling stone does not gather moss.
Publius Syrus (var. Publilius), Sententiae (c. 42 BC), Maxim 524.


Musco lapis volutus haud obducitur.

A rolling stone is not covered with moss.


The rollyng ſtone neuer gathereth moſſse.

The rolling stone never gathers moss.






Early versions include:

Saxum volutum non obducitur musco

A rolling stone does not gather moss.
Publius Syrus (var. Publilius), Sententiae (c. 42 BC), Maxim 524.


Musco lapis volutus haud obducitur.

A rolling stone is not covered with moss.


The rollyng ſtone neuer gathereth moſſse.

The rolling stone never gathers moss.




Saxum volutum non obducitur musco

A rolling stone does not gather moss.
Publius Syrus (var. Publilius), Sententiae (c. 42 BC), Maxim 524.


A rolling stone does not gather moss.
Publius Syrus (var. Publilius), Sententiae (c. 42 BC), Maxim 524.
Musco lapis volutus haud obducitur.

A rolling stone is not covered with moss.


A rolling stone is not covered with moss.
The rollyng ſtone neuer gathereth moſſse.

The rolling stone never gathers moss.


The rolling stone never gathers moss.
Rome wasn't built in a day.



The rotten apple injures its neighbors.



Rules were meant to be broken.



Say something nice or say nothing at all.



Seek and ye shall find.

Christian New Testament


Christian New Testament
Seeing is believing.



Self trust is the first secret of success.




Karl Marx


Karl Marx
Set a thief to catch a thief.



Shit or get off the pot.



Shoemaker, not above the sandal



Silence is golden.



Slow and steady wins the race.



Smile, and the world smiles with you; cry, and you cry alone.

Dela Riva, M. Pebbles in the Pond, Goodwill Trading Co., Inc.


Dela Riva, M. Pebbles in the Pond, Goodwill Trading Co., Inc.
Some days you get the bear, other days the bear gets you.



Someone who gossips to you will gossip about you.



Something is better than nothing.



A son is a son 'till he gets him a wife; a daughter's a daughter all her life.



Spare the rod, spoil the child.



The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak.

Gospel of Matthew 26:41.


Gospel of Matthew 26:41.
The squeaky wheel gets the grease.



Sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me.

Contrast: A blow with a word strikes deeper than a blow with a sword.


Contrast: A blow with a word strikes deeper than a blow with a sword.
A still tongue makes a wise head.



Still waters run deep.



A stitch in time saves nine.



Stolen fruit is the sweetest.



Strike while the iron is hot.









Success (only) comes after every necessary precaution.

Only time will tell (what was, or wasn't, necessary).


Only time will tell (what was, or wasn't, necessary).
Success grows out of struggles to overcome difficulties.



Success is a journey not a destination.



Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

From Matthew 6:34.


From Matthew 6:34.

(Possibly Lord Byron)


(Possibly Lord Byron)
Take care of the pennies and the pounds will take care of themselves.



Talk of the devil and he's sure to appear.



That which does not kill you, makes you stronger.



The dogs bark but the caravan goes on.



The worth of a thing is what it will bring.



There is luck in odd numbers.



The teacher has not taught, until the student has learned.



There is no smoke without fire.

Other meaning: A rumour contains some truth.


Other meaning: A rumour contains some truth.
There are no small parts, only small actors.



There is a thin line between love and hate.



There's always a calm before a storm.

or The calm before the storm.


or The calm before the storm.
There's many a slip 'twixt cup and lip.



Where there's muck there's brass.



There's more than one way to skin a cat.



There's no accounting for taste.

From the Latin: De gustibus non est disputandum.


From the Latin: De gustibus non est disputandum.
There's no fool like an old fool.



There's no peace for the wicked.



There's no place like home.



There is no royal road to learning.



There's no such thing as a free lunch.



There's no time like the present.



There is only eight years between success and failure in politics.

Jim Brown, Louisiana statesman..


Jim Brown, Louisiana statesman..
A thief thinks everyone steals.



Think before you speak.



This, too, shall pass.



Those who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.



Time and tide wait for none.



Time flies.

Latin: Tempus fugit!


Latin: Tempus fugit!
Time flies when you're having fun.



Time is money.



Time will tell.



Tis better to have loved and lost than to have never loved at all.

(Alfred Lord Tennyson's poem In Memoriam:27)


(Alfred Lord Tennyson's poem In Memoriam:27)
Tit for tat.



To each, his own.



To err is human; to forgive, divine.

Pope, Essay on Criticism.


Pope, Essay on Criticism.
To know the road ahead ask those coming back.



Tomorrow is another day.



Too many cooks spoil the broth.



Too much of one thing, good for nothing.

From Shakespeare


From Shakespeare
Tread on a worm and it will turn.

This Proverb is generally used by Persons who have received gross insults and
Injuries from others (which they have for some time bore with Patience) to excuse their
being at last transported to some Warmth of Resentment and Passion. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [17]


This Proverb is generally used by Persons who have received gross insults and
Injuries from others (which they have for some time bore with Patience) to excuse their
being at last transported to some Warmth of Resentment and Passion. - Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [17]
Trouble shared is trouble halved.



Truth is stranger than fiction.

Truth is always strange — stranger than fiction. Lord Byron, Don Juan.


Truth is always strange — stranger than fiction. Lord Byron, Don Juan.
The truth shall set you free, or The truth will set you free.

In the Bible, John 8:32.


In the Bible, John 8:32.
Truth will out.



Try not to become a man of success but a man of value.



Two heads are better than one.



Two things prolong your life: A quiet heart and a loving wife.



Two wrongs don't make a right.



Two is a company; three is a crowd.

A loving couple wants to be left alone.


A loving couple wants to be left alone.
Unity is strength.



Unprepare to prepare, be prepared to be unprepared.

supposedly said by W.B.Govo in 1916.


supposedly said by W.B.Govo in 1916.
Use it or lose it.



Use it up, wear it out, make do with, or do without.

Great depression era proverb.


Great depression era proverb.
Variety is the spice of life.


Variety's the very spice of life,
That gives it all its flavour.





Variety's the very spice of life,
That gives it all its flavour.


Variety's the very spice of life,
That gives it all its flavour.
Virtue which parleys is near a surrender.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [18]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [18]
The voice of the people is the voice of god.



Walk softly, carry a big stick.



Walk the walk and talk the talk.



Waste not, want not.



A watched pot never boils.



The way to a man's heart is through his stomach.



We can't always build the future for our youth, but we can build our youth for the future.



We have nothing to fear but fear itself.






The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.

Attributed to Mahatma Gandhi


Attributed to Mahatma Gandhi
Well begun is half done.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [19]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [19]
Well done is better than well said.



What a tangled web we weave, when first we practice to deceive.



What goes around comes around.



What goes up must come down.



What you see is what you get.



What you sow is what you reap.



Where there is a will, there is a way.

Similar to You reap what you sow
Based on the Bible (Gal. 6:7): for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. [20]


Similar to You reap what you sow
Based on the Bible (Gal. 6:7): for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. [20]
What's good for the goose is good for the gander.



When a thing is done advice comes too late.



When in Rome, do as the Romans do.



When one door closes, another door opens.



When the cat is away, the mice will play.

Similar to When the cat is away, the mice will rule.


Similar to When the cat is away, the mice will rule.
When the going gets tough, the tough get going.



Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise. [[21]]

Thomas Gray, Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College


Thomas Gray, Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College
Where there's a will, there's a way.



Where vice goes before, vengeance follows after.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [22]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [22]
The whole dignity of man lies in the power of thought.

B. Pascal


B. Pascal
Willful waste makes woeful want.



The wish is father to the thought.



Wise men learn by other men men's harms, fools by their own.



A woman is like a tea bag; you'll never know how strong she is until she's in hot water.



A woman's work is never done.

From a folk rhyme - A man may work from sun to sun, but woman's work is never done.


From a folk rhyme - A man may work from sun to sun, but woman's work is never done.
Women need men like a fish needs a bicycle.



A word spoken is past recalling.



The world is your oyster.



Worship the Creator not His creation.



The worst way to miss someone is to be sitting right beside them knowing you can't have them.



Work is worship.



You always admire what you really don't understand.



You always find something in the last place you look.



You can lead a horse to water, but you can't make it drink.



You know the tree by its fruit.



The younger brother the better gentleman.

Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [23]


Divers Proverbs, Nathan Bailey, 1721 [23]
You can't have an omelette unless you break the egg.



You can't see the forest for the trees' mean



You don't shit where you eat.



A baker's dozen.



Add to golden numbers golden numbers.



A flea in his ear.



After supper walk a mile.



As clear as a whistle.

John Byrom, Epistle to Lloyd, I.


John Byrom, Epistle to Lloyd, I.
As cold as cucumbers.



As high as Heaven, as deep as Hell.



A thorn in the flesh.



Bag and baggage.



Barkis is willin'.



Beat all your feathers as flat as pancakes.



Better a bad excuse, than none at all.



Big-endians and small-endians.



But me no buts.



By all that's good and glorious.



Curses are like young chickens,
And still come home to roost!



Cut and come again.



Diamonds cut diamonds.



Every one stretcheth his legs according to his coverlet.



Every why hath a wherefore.



Facts are stubborn things.



Fast bind, fast find;
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.



First come, first served.



Fitted him to a T.



From the crown of our head to the sole of our foot.



Glass, China, and Reputation, are easily crack'd and never well mended.



God save the mark!



Going as if he trod upon eggs.



Go to Jericho.
Let them all go to Jericho,
And ne'er be seen againe.



Go West, young man! Go West.



Go West, young man, and grow up with the country.



Hail, fellow, well met.



Harp not on that string.



He can give little to his servant that licks his knife.



He comes not in my books.



He did not care a button for it.



Here's metal more attractive.



Hide their diminished heads.



Hier lies that should fetch a perfect woman over the coles.



His bark is worse than his bite.



Hit the nail on the head.



Hold one another's noses to the grindstone hard.



Hold their noses to the grindstone.



Honey of Hybla.



How well I feathered my nest.



I have other fish to fry.



I have you on the hip.



I'll have a fling.



I'll make the fur
Fly 'bout the ears of the old cur.



I'll put a spoke among your wheels.



In the name of the Prophet—figs.



Leap out of the frying pan into the fire.



Let the worst come to the worst.



Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none.



Love, and a Cough, cannot be hid.



Made no more bones.



Make ducks and drakes with shillings.



Make three bites of a cherry.



Many a smale maketh a grate.



Mariana in the moated grange.



Mind your P's and Q's.



Moche Crye and no Wull.



Much of a muchness.



Needle in a bottle of hay.



Neither fish, flesh nor good red herring.



No better than you should be.



No rule is so general, which admits not some exception.



Nought venter nought have.



Old Lady of Threadneedle Street.



On his last legs.



One good turn deserves another.



Originality provokes originality.



Passing the Rubicon.



Performed to a T.



Pons Asinorum.

The asses' bridge.


The asses' bridge.
Present company excepted.



Push on—keep moving.



Put himself upon his good behaviour.



Put your toong in your purse.



Quo vadis?

Whither goest thou?


Whither goest thou?
Safe bind, safe find.



Scared out of his seven senses.



Set all at sixe and seven.



Smell a rat.



Snug as a bug in a rug.



Something given that way.



So obliging that he ne'er oblig'd.



Sop to Cerebus.

If I can find that Cerebus a sop, I shall be at rest for one day.


If I can find that Cerebus a sop, I shall be at rest for one day.
So was hir jolly whistel wel y-wette.



Spare your breath to cool your porridge.



Strike the iron whilst it is hot.



Strike while the iron is hot.



That was laid on with a trowel.



The coast was clear.



The fat's all in the fire.



The finest edge is made with the blunt whetstone.



The foule Toade hath a faire stone in his head.



The man that heweth over high,
Some chip falleth in his eye.



The more thou stir it the worse it will be.



The next way home's the farthest way about.



The point is plain as a pike staff.



The short and the long of it.



The total depravity of inanimate things.



This is a pretty flimflam.



Though this may be play to you,
'Tis death to us.



Thou will scarce be a man before thy mother.



Three things are men most likely to be cheated in, a horse, a wig, and a wife.



Through thick and thin, both over bank and bush.



Through thick and thin, both over Hill and Plain.



Through thick and thin.



Though last, not least in love.



Thursday come, and the week is gone.



'Tis as cheap sitting as standing.



'Tis a stinger.



'Tis in grain, sir, 'twill endure wind and weather.



'Tis neither here nor there.



To rise with the lark, and go to bed with the lamb.



To take the nuts from the fire with the dog's foot.



Turn over a new leaf.



Walls have tongues, and hedges ears.



Westward-ho!



What is bred in the bone will never come out of the flesh.



What is not in a man cannot come out of him surely.



What is sauce for the goose is sauce for a gander.



What is the matter with Kansas?



What mare's nest hast thou found?



What you would not have done to yourselves, never do unto others.



When a dog is drowning, every one offers him drink.



Where McGregor sits, there is the head of the table.



Whether the pitcher hits the stone or the stone hits the pitcher, it goes ill with the pitcher.



Whistle, and I'll come to you, my lad.



Whistle, and she'll come to you.



Wind puffs up empty bladders; opinion, fools.



With tooth and nail.



Within a stone's throw of it.



Whose house is of glass, must not throw stones at another.



Why, then, do you walk as if you had swallowed a ramrod?



You shall never want rope enough.



You whirled them to the back of beyond.



English Proverbs Center Over 2000 English proverbs and Sayings.
Proverb Hunter English Proverbs Explained
Proverbs and their meanings
English Proverbs Video
English Proverbs App
Proverbs by language
Pages using ISBN magic links
Not logged in
Talk
Contributions
Create account
Log in
Page
Discussion
Read
Edit
View history
Main Page
Community portal
Village pump
Recent changes
Random page
Help
Donate
Contact Wikiquote
People
Literary works
Proverbs
Films
TV shows
Themes
Categories
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Ænglisc
العربية
Azərbaycanca
Български
Bosanski
Čeština
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Esperanto
Español
Eesti
Euskara
فارسی
Suomi
Galego
עברית
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
日本語
ქართული
한국어
Limburgs
Lietuvių
മലയാളം
Nederlands
Norsk nynorsk
Norsk
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Shqip
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文
This page was last edited on 29 January 2018, at 19:01.
Privacy policy
About Wikiquote
Disclaimers
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view



